---
description: These are just some notes from the aticle
---

# Science and the Book of Genesis

[https://www.evernote.com/shard/s101/sh/79d5b180-e544-4e94-ab7c-a93ff980016a/0b4128f4005091ca2a6bbffa2ca71849](https://www.evernote.com/shard/s101/sh/79d5b180-e544-4e94-ab7c-a93ff980016a/0b4128f4005091ca2a6bbffa2ca71849)

Note that in this conception of creation the focus is not on the origins of the raw materials used to make the universe, but rather their fashioning into a structure providing a useful purpose. The key insight, according to Walton, is that: “people in the ancient world believed that something existed not by virtue of its material proportion, _but by virtue of its having a function in an ordered system._ Consequently, something could be manufactured physically but still not exist’ if it has not become functional . The ancient world viewed the cosmos more like a company or kingdom” that comes into existence at the moment it is organized, not when the people who participate it were created materially \(ibid., pp. 26, 35; cf. J. Smith, Jr., Teachings, 5 January 1841, p. 181, Abraham 4:1\).

Walton continues:

It has long been observed that in the contexts of _bara’_ \[the Hebrew term translated “create”\] no materials for the creative act are ever mentioned, and an investigation of all the passages mentioned above substantiate that claim. How interesting it is that these scholars then draw the conclusion that _bara’_ implies creation out of nothing \(_ex nihilo_\). One can see with a moment of thought that such a conclusion assumes that “create” is a material activity. To expand their reasoning for clarity’s sake here: Since “create” is a material activity \(assumed on their part\), and since the contexts never mention the materials used \(as demonstrated by the evidence\), then the material object must have been brought into existence without using other materials \(i.e., out of nothing\). But one can see that the whole line of reasoning only works if one can assume that _bara’_ is a material activity. In contrast, if, as the analysis of objects presented above suggests, _bara’_ is a functional activity, it would be ludicrous to expect that materials are being used in the activity. In other words, the absence of reference to materials, rather than suggesting material creation out of nothing, is better explained as indication that _bara’_ is not a material activity but a functional one \(J. H. Walton, Lost World, pp. 43-44\).

In summary, the evidence from the Old Testament as well as from the ancient Near East suggests that both defined the pre-creation state in similar terms and as featuring an absence of functions rather than an absence of material. Such information supports the idea that their concept of existence was linked to functionality and that creation was an activity of bringing functionality to a nonfunctional condition rather than bringing material substance to a situation in which matter was absent. The evidence of matter \(the waters of the deep in Genesis 1:2\) in the precreation state then supports this view” \(ibid., p. 53\).

Smith notes a variation on the first Hebrew word of Genesis \(_bere’shit_\) and the description used in Ezekiel 45:18 for the first month of a priestly offering \(_bari’shon_\): “Thus said the Lord: In the beginning \(month\) on the first \(day\) of the month, you shall take a bull of the herd without blemish, and you shall cleanse the sanctuary.’ What makes this verse particularly relevant for our discussion of _bere’shit_ is that _ri’shon_ occurs in close proxmity to _‘ehad_, which contextually designates \(day\) one’ that is the first day’ of the month. This combination of in the beginning’ \(_bari’shon_\) with with \(day\) one’ \(_yom ‘ehad_\) is reminiscent of in beginning of’ \(_bere’shit_\) in Genesis 1:1 and day one’ \(_yom ‘ehad_\) in Genesis 1:5″ \(M. S. Smith, Priestly Vision, p. 47\).

Hahn notes the same correspondences to the creation of the cosmos in the building of Solomon’s Temple \(S. W. Hahn, Christ, Kingdom, pp. 176-177; cf. J. Morrow, Creation; J. D. Levenson, Temple and World, pp. 283-284; C. H. T. Fletcher-Louis, Glory, pp. 62-65; M. Weinfeld, Sabbath, pp. 506, 508\):

As creation takes seven days, the Temple takes seven years to build \(1 Kings 6:38\). It is dedicated during the seven-day Feast of Tabernacles \(1 Kings 8:2\), and Solomon’s solemn dedication speech is built on seven petitions \(1 Kings 8:31-53\). As God capped creation by “resting” on the seventh day, the Temple is built by a “man of rest” \(1 Chronicles 22:9\) to be a “house of rest” for the Ark, the presence of the Lord \(1 Chronicles 28:2; 2 Chronicles 6:41; Psalm 132:8, 13-14; Isaiah 66:1\).

When the Temple is consecrated, the furnishings of the older Tabernacle are brought inside it. \(R. E. Friedman suggests the entire Tabernacle was brought inside\). This represents the fact that all the Tabernacle was, the Temple has become. Just as the construction of the Tabernacle of the Sinai covenant had once recapitulated creation, now the Temple of the Davidic covenant recapitulated the same. The Temple is a microcosm of creation, the creation a macro-temple.

